(gentle music)
- [Voiceover] There
are things a man cannot
simply live without.
Even something as
tiny as a grain.
For 8,000 years,
rice or oryza sativa,
has endured as a major
source of nourishment,
of life, for the vast populous
of the Asian continent.
While maize is the number
one crop cultivated today,
it can be said that rice
is an important food crop,
because it's
cultivation is largely,
if not mainly,
dedicated to human
consumption and nutrition.
Rice is a very diverse crop,
with thousands of
varieties around the world.
This is probably the
reason why its origin
has been debated upon for years.
But a 2011 study, conducted
by New York University
published in the
precedings of the National
Academy of Sciences,
established what
Japonica and Indica,
the two major subspecies
of rice, have the
same origin due to the
many genetic similarities
they possess.
They study also
strongly believes
that rice came about
around 8,200 years ago,
and genetic
diversification happened
3,900 years ago, resulting
in the subspecies
Japonica, and Indica.
The results also
corroborated archaeological
evidence, showing that
domestication began
in the Yongtze Valley in China
approximately 8,000
to 9,000 years ago.
And in the Ganges
region in India
some 4,000 years ago.
Rice then traveled
further into Europe
via several routes.
It reached the
roman empire during
Alexander the Great's
expedition to India,
though the Romans imported
it mostly to make wine.
Then it entered the
Balkan peninsula,
and then Italy from Turkey.
And it could have
reached Spain through
Greece or Egypt.
From Europe, particularly Spain,
rice then voyaged to
Central and South America
during the 16th
and 18th centuries.
It continued to spread
throughout the new world,
that by 1690 there
was already a steady
production in South Carolina.
It expanded into nearby states
such as Mississippi,
southwest Louisiana,
Texas, central Arkansas,
and even as far as
California by 1909.
Chinese immigrants
brought rice with them
to Hawaii between 1853 and 1862,
but it did not fair
well against the more
popular industries of
sugarcane and pineapple.
Rice needs an ample amount
of water to survive.
It can be grown in
high elevations,
granted that irrigation
and water controlling
systems are in place.
It also thrives well
in hot climates such as
in the Philippines,
Indonesia, and Brazil.
It grows from three
to six feet tall,
with long slender
leaves that are 20
to 39 inches in length,
and a pendulous
inflorescence that is
12 to 20 inches long.
Cultivation is rather
labor extensive,
due it its specific
irrigation requirements.
During its early
vegetation stage,
water depth must
be at two to three
centimeters to help
its roots hold ground.
During its reproductive stage,
water should be between
five and seven centimeters,
and must be kept
at this level until
the grains are milky.
Only one to two
weeks before harvest
can the rice paddy
be drained of water.
Rice under goes milling,
or refining processes.
The first milling
removes the outer husks,
producing brown rice.
The second milling
removes the bran,
the rest of the
husk, and the germ,
producing white rice.
White rice is the most
popular form of this
grain because of its
longer shelf life.
Though many now
prefer brown rice
because of its
higher, and quality
nutritional profile.
Rice is a true global grain.
From China, it has
conquered the world
by proving its
value for mankind's
nourishment and survival.
Rice is a true global grain.
(gentle music)
Rice is one of today's
major food crops.
As a matter of fact, in 2009
531.6 million metric tons
of rice was consumed
around the world.
Over the years, many
have gradually shifted
from white rice to brown rice
due to belief that
the latter has
far better benefits.
Here is a comparison of
their nutritional profile
based on a 100 gram serving.
White rice has 28.17
grams of carbohydrates,
2.69 grams of protein,
130 kilocalories,
and .4 grams of fiber.
Brown rice has lower
carbohydrates and protein
at 22.96, and 2.58
grams respectively,
but it is better
in terms of fiber
and calorie content
at 1.8 grams, and
111 kilocalories.
Both may have ten
milligrams of calcium,
and white rice has higher
iron at 1.2 milligrams,
but brown rice out wins white
when it comes to other minerals.
Brown rice has 43
milligrams of magnesium,
and white rice only has 12.
Brown rice has 83
milligrams of phosphorous,
and white rice only has 43.
Brown rice has 43
milligrams of potassium,
white rice only has 35.
Brown rice has .63
milligrams of zinc,
and white rice only has .49.
Brown rice also
has slightly higher
B vitamin values.
It has .025 milligrams
of riboflavin,
and white rice has .013.
It has 1.53
milligrams of niacin,
and white rice has 1.48.
It has .145 milligrams
of vitamin B6,
and white rice only has .093.
White rice, however,
has significant levels
of folate, at 97 micrograms,
compared to brown
rice's four micrograms.
And it has .163
milligrams of thiamin,
while brown rice has .096.
(upbeat music)
Diabetic patients
are often encouraged
to eat brown rice
instead of white.
According to numerous studies,
consumption of half a
cup of brown rice a day
can help reduce the
risks of developing
diabetes by 60 percent.
It can also provide 80
percent of a person's
daily manganese requirement,
which helps in keeping
good blood sugar levels
by regulating the
synthesis and secretion
of insulin in the body.
The significant
amount of magnesium
in brown rice can
also act as the body's
natural calcium channel blocker,
which can reduce
frequency of migraines,
asthma, and lower
risks of heart attacks
and strokes.
How?
Calcium can over
activate nerve cells,
and cause them to
contract and become tense.
Magnesium helps balance
the activity of calcium
and prevents it from rushing
into the nerve cells.
When nerve and
muscle contraction,
especially in the
heart, is regulated,
spasms, cramps,
tension, soreness,
asthma, and fatigue
can be alleviated.
Brown rice also has
top marks in weight
management, due to
its fiber content.
Combining brown rice
with other high fiber,
low-fat foods, and
plenty of water
can effectively curb
a person's appetite.
And together with its
antioxidant properties,
like phenolic, and
flavanoid compounds,
it can help eliminate
free radicals
before they mutate
into cancerous cells
and cause damage to organs.
It's a good thing
that the nutritional
benefits of rice,
particularly brown rice,
are becoming
increasingly recognized
outside of Asia.
Because it can then
offer those struggling
with diabetes and
coronary heart diseases
with an alternative
to better manage
their health conditions.
(gentle music)
As a native of the
Asian continent,
rice is deeply
embedded in rituals
and customs of the Asian people.
Like amaranth and
maize, which were used
in various ceremonies
in South America,
rice also has multifaceted roles
in Asian culture.
In most western countries,
rice is thrown at
a newly wed couple
after the wedding ceremony,
as a sign of fertility.
In India, rice is used in
several wedding rituals.
In some regions, couples
stand on a pile of rice
during the ceremony
as a form of prayer
for sustenance and prosperity.
The Hindu's also
believe that rice has
powers against demons,
so the bride and groom
usually pour rice
into a wedding bonfire to
keep bad entities away.
In Kerala, a state
in southern India,
farmers celebrate
makam, or October fifth
in the modern calender,
as the birthday of rice.
Five rice grains are
anointed with sacred ashes,
sandalwood paste,
and ground turmeric
called coom coom and
are placed on a sacred
platter called taalam.
The taalam is then
placed in a traditional
chamber called thekkepura,
as an offering to the
Hindu goddess Parvati.
Parvati loves a rice
pudding called paachoru,
which is made from boiled rice,
milk, sugar, jaggery, coconut,
and turmeric.
Household women in
a state of purity,
cook this pudding
and after offering it
to Parvati they
serve it to farmers
and family members.
When Kerala farmers
started giving up rice
to grow other crops in the 70's,
this birthday
tradition unfortunately
also started to
fade, with only a few
isolated places
left celebrating it.
In China, there is
a myth that rice is
not a boon from the gods,
but rather a gift from animals.
According to the story,
after a series of floods
devastated low lying
lands and farms,
people were left
with nothing to eat.
Hunting was difficult
because even
animals were scarce.
Until one day they saw a dog,
and hanging on its tail
were long, yellow seeds.
They planted the
seeds, and soon enough
they harvested rice
and eradicated hunger.
And finally, water
reservoirs and dams
designed to hold and store water
collected during the high
tide were constructed
during the Tang and
Song dynasties between
1618 and 1279 BC.
The Philippines is also
a large producer of rice.
Then and now, the 3,000 year old
Banaue Rice Terraces
in the Cordillera
mountain range of Luzon,
is ancient proof of
rice's long history
in the country.
It is believed that the
terraces, 1,500 meters
meters in height
and 10,360 square
kilometers in length, were
carved largely by hand.
Today, the Banaue Rice Terraces
is an acknowledged
world heritage site,
by the United
Nations Educational,
Scientific, and
Cultural Organization,
or UNESCO, and is considered the
eighth wonder of the world.
In certain Asian
countries like China,
Bangladesh, and Thailand,
instead of, "How are you?",
"Have you eaten
your rice today?",
is a more common greeting.
(gentle piano music)
In China too, "happy
new year" is not
typically used,
instead they say,
"May your rice never burn",
to wish someone of prosperity.
If you are traveling
to Taiwan and China,
do not poke your
chopsticks into a mound
of rice, because that
symbolizes death.
It is undeniable
that rice has major
contributions to the
wonderful and colorful
tapestry of
traditions and customs
all around Asia.
And it will continue to
add interesting layers
to that tapestry in
the years to come.
(gentle music)
China is the widely
known cradle of rice,
followed by India.
Since its early cultivation
some 8,000 years ago,
rice remains to be the
predominant crop planted,
grown, and exported by
these two countries.
Based on data gathered
by the United Nations'
Food and Agricultural
Organization,
or FAO, these are the
top ten rice producing
countries in the world in 2012.
Number one is mainland China,
with 204,285,000 metric tons.
Number two is India,
with 152,600,000 metric tons.
Number three is Indonesia,
with 69,045,141 metric tons.
Number four is Vietnam,
with 43,661,569 metric tons.
Number five is Thailand,
with 37,800,000 metric tons.
Followed by Bangladesh
at number six,
Myanmar at number seven,
Philippines at number eight,
Brazil at number nine,
and Japan at number ten.
Manual harvesting and
lack of modern farming
technology and knowledge
is a post harvest
problem the FAO,
and the world bank
is looking into
and aiming to solve.
According to a World
Bank-FAO study,
eight to 26 percent of
rice is lost each year
in rice producing
developing countries
because of poor
transportation infrastructure,
inadequate storage technology,
and supply chains, and
farmers' lack of access
to retail markets.
These post harvest
losses pose a threat
to global food security.
The World Bank-FAO study
also estimates that
these green losses
experienced by developing
countries such as India,
is already equivalent
to 89 billion US
dollars worth of income.
Also, if these grain
losses are collected
and saved, India alone
will have enough rice
grains to feed 70 million
to 100 million people
for a year.
Rice is a major key in
global food security
since it is a staple food
in many Asian countries,
and especially now
that consumption in the
United States has
seen a steady increase
in the last 25 years.
Aside from being a staple
carbohydrate source
of Asian people, rice
also has other uses.
Ground rice, or rice
flower, is used in beer
and wine production,
and in other traditional
beverages such as
the Japanese amazake,
and the South American horchata.
Rice is also now
rivaling maize and wheat
in the production of
infant food and formula,
snack food, and
breakfast cereals.
Rice is gluten free,
so it's a very good
substitute for people
with gluten intolerance,
and it is now used
as a main ingredient
for face powders.
Rice powder is also
now used as a polishing
agent for camera
lenses and jewelry.
Discarded rice
straws are still used
in rope and paper making,
and as cattle feed in
many parts of Asia.
Though it is used in
some non-food items,
rice remains to be an
important food crop,
but according to the
International Rice
Research Institute
in the Philippines,
in order for mankind
to benefit from this
grain in the years to come,
it needs to be biofortified with
essential nutrients and minerals
such as iron, and zinc.
The institute is
currently conducting
biofortification projects,
not just to increase
rice's micronutrient
value, but to also
develop high-yielding varieties.
Rice may not be as
versatile as wheat
in terms of end products
and by-products,
but the daily meals of
the majority of Asian
families will never
be complete without
a bowl of hot, steamy rice
on their dinner tables.
(gentle music)
Aside from its
color, white, brown,
or red, rice is also
distinguished according to its
grain length, long,
medium, and short.
The long grains tend to
retain their individual
shape after cooking,
and the medium grains
become sticky.
Because of the sticky
texture of medium grains,
they are commonly used
in risotto in Italy,
in arros negre in Spain,
and in sushi in Japan.
Short grains are
usually cooked into
rice puddings.
Since many are
switching to brown rice,
here is its basic
cooking method.
Combine one cup of brown rice
and two cups of
water in a sauce pan.
Cover it and bring it to a boil.
Once boiling, reduce the heat
and let it simmer
for 44 to 50 minutes.
Unless you're making a risotto,
do not stir, because
stirring will
release extra starch.
Aside from the
conventional risotto,
and porridge recipes,
here are two unique
recipes you can try
using rice.
The first is Rice Mango Pudding.
For this recipe you will need
100 grams of short grain rice,
50 grams of castor sugar,
800 milliliters of coconut milk,
one ripe mango,
three table spoons of
dairy-free margarine,
three table spoons
of light brown sugar,
and two tablespoons
of orange juice.
First, in an ovenproof dish,
combine rice, castor
sugar, and coconut milk,
and bake at 120 degrees Celcius,
or 250 degrees Fahrenheit,
for two and a half hours.
Sir every half hour
to avoid clumping.
Second, while the
rice is in the oven
you can make the sauce.
Peel the mango, and
slice into small cubes,
then set aside.
In a small saucepan,
put the margarine,
brown sugar, and orange juice,
and put it over
low heat until the
margarine melts.
Add the mango cubes,
and let the mixture
simmer for ten minutes.
Cool it, transfer to a bowl,
and use a stick
blender to transform
into a smooth sauce.
And third, remove
the rice pudding
from the oven, stir
well, and spoon into
small serving bowls.
Pour the mango
sauce on each bowl,
and serve.
The second recipe is a cooling
Colombian Rice Beverage.
You will need 50 grams of rice,
one cup of water,
three cinnamon sticks,
four table spoons of sugar,
one liter of water,
and 150 grams of
sliced pineapple.
Making it is very easy.
First, cook the rice
in one cup of water
with the cinnamon
sticks to infuse flavor.
One cooked, removed
the cinnamon sticks,
and transfer rice to a blender.
Add the sugar and
one liter of water,
and then blend until smooth.
In a tall glass,
put some ice cubes,
pieces of pineapple,
and pour the rice
mixture up to the brim.
This can be served with cookies,
cornbread, and cheese breads.
Different countries may
have varying recipes
using rice, but one fact
is common for all of them.
And that is they owe
their daily strength
and nourishment to
this ancient grain
called rice.
(gentle music)